Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Official YIFY movies site:
[dramatic music]
- [Liam] The Dyatlov Pass
incident
is the story of the death
of nine student hikers
in the Ural Mountains.
It's often referred to as
Russia's greatest mystery.
In 1959. after failing to report
back.
nine students were found frozen
to death
in sub polar conditions.
- When I was working for
the Moscow Times newspaper
and I came across the
information
about the Dyatlov Pass mystery.
the difference between
all kind of mysteries
and this particular one.
is that it's very well
documented.
There is criminal case.
There are pictures.
There are diaries.
There are still witnesses who
were there. a rescue party.
So one can still do
investigation.
- [Liam] Found without
their winter clothes
miles from their shredded tent
and with no sign of an
avalanche or natural disasters.
Yet somehow. they suffered
injuries
that crushed their bodies
and horrifically for some.
their tongues and eyeballs were
missing.
- It appears that the
officials involved at the time
of the autopsies basically
tried to sweep this entire thing
under the rug.
trying to make it look like
some unfortunate accident.
- [Liam] Mysterious lights
were seen in the sky
and the Russian KGB swarmed the
site.
clouding the whole story
in 60 years of mystery.
Today. there are two sides to
this case.
What was reported by the
official
investigators at the time.
which seems almost willfully
incomplete.
And then there's the years
of conspiracy theories
of Soviet government
coverups and military tests.
- The cover-ups are so
farfetched I think.
They're a way for people to
explain
the unexplainable or the
unexplained.
Whereas the reality is some
cases are just tough to solve.
- [Liam] The story has
inspired many Russian TV shows
and documentaries
pedaling armchair theories
from alien visitors to the
Russian Yeti.
[dramatic music]
- [Liam] With so many
conflicting stories.
I've come to Russia to ask the
question.
what is the true story
of the Dyatlov Pass?
[dramatic music]
I became obsessed with
this story after reading
the hundreds of bizarre
and unusual theories.
Military coverups. UFOs
and even a Russian Yeti have
been blamed.
But I soon realize the real
story is even more sinister
than I ever could have imagined.
Using the hikers' actual
photos and diaries.
this is what we know so far.
In January. 1959. a
team of 10 young hikers
led by group leader. Igor
Dyatlov.
began the doomed expedition
deep into the Ural Mountains.
10 days into their journey.
and the team reaches the
peak known to the locals
as the Dead Mountain.
Then. something goes terribly
wrong.
In the middle of the
night. for reasons unknown.
the hikers cut their way out of
the tent.
Tracks showed they fled down the
mountain
in freezing conditions
without winter clothes or boots.
Weeks after they were due to
report back.
search parties were sent out.
only to uncover the worst.
They were found more than a mile
away.
each one suffering inexplicable
injury.
Ranging from cuts and
bruises to fractured skulls.
broken ribs and even a missing
tongue.
The Soviet government closed the
case
and sealed the records.
stating only that the
hikers had frozen to death
for reasons unknown.
Renewed interest began
more than 30 years later
after the fall of the Soviet
Union.
And the original case file
was released to the public.
Searching through hundreds
of online articles.
I started to spot some
inconsistencies.
That's when I found a group of
Russians
dedicated to uncovering the
truth.
I reached out to Yuri
Kuntsevitch
founder of the Dyatlov
Foundation
in Yekaterinburg. Russia.
I asked a lot of questions.
hardly expecting to receive a
reply.
And then I did.
[dramatic music]
What started out as a somewhat
obsessive Google search.
just got very real.
I think I've always been
obsessed
with trying to figure out
why things are the way they are.
And I don't like. we
don't know. as an answer.
I've always loved exploring
weird
and sometimes dangerous
locations.
And I think that's what brought
me
to documentary filmmaking
in the first place.
I started my filmmaking
career 20 years ago
in television news.
And I realized pretty early on.
if you want to get the real
story.
you have to get out and talk to
people.
And this story is driving me
crazy.
I keep watching so many
online videos and podcasts
all repackaging the same
information.
But that's not an investigation.
It's not adding anything new to
the story.
Before I decide if I should go
to Russia.
I have someone closer to home
that can help me understand
the hikers story.
Svetlana Oss is a Russian
journalist.
now living in the US.
She broke what was probably the
first English language story
on the Dyatlov group for
the Moscow Times in 2007.
She has since written one of
the most well-researched books
on the subject.
And I'm keen to learn more
from her about this case.
- There is so much behind the
story.
There is so much information
that need to be considered.
Some people believe
that aliens killed them.
Some people believe it was
American spies
who are responsible.
There are so many crazy stories
that it was sex responsible
for some tension
among the group members and
they just killed each other.
I think all these
theories are pretty weird.
- [Liam] The unusual details in
this case
have given rise to so
many strange theories.
The first and perhaps most
confusing
is that the criminal case
appears to have begun
before the hikers were
even reported missing.
- This is a criminal case.
I believe you have it.
It's a new cover.
- [Liam] Okay.
- Some people believe that the
very fact
that we can find six here
says that the authorities
knew something before. that
they wanted to hide something.
- [Liam] What's unusual is that
the hikers
were not due to report back
until at the very earliest.
the 12th of February.
So how could a case have been
started
a week before anyone
would have even suspected
they were missing?
For many. this has been one of
the most compelling arguments
for Soviet government coverup.
But for me. it's proof
that there's so much
that's misunderstood about this
case.
There's another document in the
file.
which we know from its detail
was clearly from an
interview conducted in March.
but it was accidentally
dated the 6th of February.
And it's this date that
was copied in error
to the front cover.
A simple clerical error igniting
years
of conspiracy theories.
But the mysteries certainly
don't stop there.
and others are harder to
explain.
I'm convinced more than ever
that if I want to find the
truth. I have to go to Russia.
I keep telling myself it will be
safe.
but without knowing what
actually happened to the hikers.
how can I be sure?
[dramatic music]
Having filmed documentaries
around the world.
I'm used to a certain
amount of the unknown.
But this is my first time in
Russia.
and certainly. my first time
without a production team
or support.
Unsure how welcomed we would be
by the Russian government
for investigating this case.
my cameraman and I have
flown in under the radar
and told as few people as
possible.
Easier for us to go unnoticed
perhaps easier to go missing.
[dramatic music]
Yuri Kuntsevitch was just a
young boy
when he attended the funerals
of the hikers in 1959.
He himself joined the
university's Explorers Club
and has since been on
many winter expeditions.
including several to the Dyatlov
Pass.
He's now at the very center of
this story
as curator of the Dyatlov
foundation.
His home office
has become a real life
treasure trove of documents.
evidence and personal
belongings from the hikers.
Some of which are at the
very heart of the mystery.
Tell me. I know there
is a famous flashlight
that was found on the tent.
Is this the flashlight?
So someone threw it on top of
the scene.
That's unusual. isn't it?
The cameras found in the
tent and on Zolotaryov.
along with several rolls of
film.
give us some of the best
evidence in the case.
Yet none are as mysterious
as the famous 34th frame.
This last picture taken by the
hikers
is just one of many strange
details that have convinced Yuri
and his colleagues that
this was no accident.
But if something scared
them out of the tent.
why didn't they just return
when the threat had passed?
Why would they leave behind
their warm clothes and boots?
Everything they needed to stay
alive.
[upbeat music]
- They were a young people
and they were friends.
They all were students at
Ural Polytechnical University.
For them going to mountains to
challenge
their elements was
something really exciting.
Igor Dyatlov was considered
to be the most experienced
member of the Explorers Club.
This guy was kind of not
interested in anything else
but in what we call
tourism. going to mountains.
It was like his passion.
Zina. she had such a bright
personality.
She was in many expeditions.
Some people think that Igor
really was involved with Zina.
which is not true.
Probably he was into her
because we know that her
picture was found in his pocket.
We know by now that she was not
interested
in Igor romantically
because she liked another
guy. Yuri Doroshenko.
We just know that he came
from a very poor family.
He was a very brave person.
On one expedition.
there was a bear approaching the
tent.
Having nothing in his hands.
he confronted the bear
and made the bear leave.
And of course. Zina saw this
and she was really impressed.
Maybe it was the moment
when she fell in love.
But this was over by the time
the expedition was scheduled.
they still were on good terms.
- [Liam] Much of what we now
know
from the group's journey comes
from their very own diaries.
which were found abandoned in
that tent.
- Lyudmila was experienced in
tourism too.
She looked like a really shy.
cute girl
but she was very strong.
Once she was even shot in her
leg by mistake by some Hunter.
And she persevered through that.
Rustem Slobodin was the most
athletic guy in the group.
He was really well-trained
physically.
I know that the father of
Rustem just couldn't believe
that Rustem couldn't make
through that.
Sasha Kolevatov was a cool guy
among them.
We don't see him often on
pictures.
He was a very private person.
- [Liam] One member of the team
proves to be even more
enigmatic to this day.
37 year old Semyon Zolotaryov
wasn't previously known
to the rest of the group
but he had requested
to join the expedition
just weeks before their
departure.
- [Svetlana] He was working
as instructor of tourism.
He also needed one more
expedition
for some upgrading in his work.
- [Liam] An experienced
outdoorsman and soldier.
Zolotaryov was awarded
medals for his service
in World War II.
And despite the age difference.
it seems Zolotaryov was quickly
accepted into the group.
- [Svetlana] We know that the
students
kind of embraced this guy.
He got really well with
the rest in the group.
Well Thibeaux. he could
make friends easily.
Pretty soon. he has become
inseparable with Zolotaryov.
Thibeaux was pretty mature and
serious guy
despite being very young.
- 23 year-old Yuri
Krivonischenko
was considered the joker
amongst the group.
And his playful antics almost
changed
the entire course of events.
- [Svetlana] They were
awaiting for their next train.
He asked. "Lyuda. can
you give us some money
for going to the cafe?"
She had all the money for the
trip.
And for some reasons she said
no.
- The whole group asked the
officers to let Yuri go.
which was pretty brave of them.
Because at that time in Soviet
Union.
you don't want to mess with
police.
The very fact that the whole
group spoke up for Yuri.
testifies that they were
really. really great friends.
- [Liam] There was a 10th member
of the doomed expedition.
The only one who would return
alive.
- Yuri Yudin is an enigma
person.
Girls trusted him.
He was not cool.
He was not sarcastic.
He was just kind and a good
friend.
Yuri had to quit the trip.
I know that he suffered a
great deal because of this.
He told me. "If I could
ask God only one question.
that would be what
happened to my friends?"
- Dyatlov and the team
are commemorated here
at the Yekaterinburg cemetery.
It's a powerful moment for me.
And a reminder that these
people weren't just some story
on the internet. but were
real people with real lives.
families and friends.
Being here makes me realize
that if I really want to
understand what happened to
them.
I need to understand their
journey.
I have to attempt to
retrace the hikers' steps
to the Dyatlov Pass.
Named after the expedition
leader. Igor Dyatlov.
the Dyatlov Pass is a
dangerous place to reach
in winter even today.
But I found someone willing to
guide me
on what should be an eight day
expedition
to the sub polar region
of the Ural Mountains.
I'm told if anyone can get
me there. it's this man.
- How's the weather looking?
- It's getting better. yeah.
- Yeah.
What's the route. it's a train
up.
- Okay. straight to there.
- When we get to the Pass.
we will stay one night. first
night.
- But if anyone was to get
hurt or anything like that.
what's the plan to get...
- To get out.
- [Interpreter] There is no
exit.
- So. the camera gear
is all pretty much ready
and yeah. tomorrow we go on
our journey to the Dyatlov Pass
and I'm pretty excited
for the adventure of it.
I've got to admit.
But at the same time.
apprehensive.
It's serious undertaking.
I was told that we needed to
upgrade our winter equipment
because some of the stuff I
brought wasn't good enough.
I think there's no
messing around with this.
I mean. this is serious
conditions.
We can't forget that a
number of the hikers died
from hypothermia and that's
something we've really got
to take into consideration.
Tomorrow. the journey begins
to the frozen wilderness
and the very mountain
where the Dyatlov group
spent their last night alive.
[dramatic music]
What do you think might
have happen to them?
- Yeah. your opinion.
- [Liam] Facing increased media
attention.
the prosecutor's office launched
a new investigation in 2018
and its recent conclusion
backed the avalanche theory.
The report stated that
the hikers fled their tent
at the first signs of an
avalanche on Mount
Kholat-Syakhl.
Descending far from the tent
without the winter clothes or
boots.
they subsequently died from
hypothermia and natural events.
The finding seems to
present a simple conclusion
to the case. but for
many. it doesn't hold up.
Vladislav Karelin was a fellow
hiker
and friend of Dyatlov.
He joined the search
efforts to find his friends.
83 year-old Alexsie. was
close friends with the group
and also has serious
doubts about an avalanche.
Perhaps the investigation
photos from the time
explain why the lead
investigator. Lev Ivanov.
felt that such an
avalanche was implausible.
One of the last photos taken by
the hikers
clearly shows ski poles placed
at the front of the tent.
These ski poles seem to have
been unmoved by any avalanche
when the search teams
arrived several weeks later.
[dramatic music]
- [Liam] With little more
than a few hours sleep
on the train.
we retraced the hikers' 50
mile journey to Vizhay by car.
The cramped vehicle seemed
surprisingly capable
on these snow covered roads.
but that's not the case for
everyone.
It strikes me just how important
it is
to help your fellow traveler
in these freezing conditions.
After all. you never know
when it might be your time in
need.
And it's not lost on me
that Lyuda's next diary note
on the very same stretch
of road is an uncanny echo
of our own journey.
- [Liam] Vizhay was the
last official village
on the hikers journey
and gateway to the Ural
Mountains
for many adventurous hikers.
[dogs howling]
The team makes last minute
preparations
for the ambitious journey ahead.
Our group of four will
lead on snowmobile.
A backup team will follow a day
or so behind on Husky sleds.
I'm curious to find out
what the team thinks about the
mystery.
So tell me.
what do you think might have
happened to the Dyatlov team?
- Do you believe
that's something that's possible
that could have happened?
The Mansi are the indigenous
people that have lived
in the Russian Siberian
region for thousands of years.
Some members of a prominent
Mansi family
even offered to help
with the search efforts.
And as possible witnesses
to the strange events.
I'm hoping to encounter
some of the Mansi people
on our journey.
There's no backing out now.
Whatever happened to the hikers
in 1959.
we'll just have to hope
was a one off incident.
- [Narrator] "January 26"
- [Liam] Leaving the last real
town
and any access to emergency
services.
we follow the wide meandering
path
of the frozen Lozva river.
We're traveling 100 miles
on an eight day expedition.
through freezing temperatures
and dangerous conditions
to reach the Dyatlov Pass.
The biting cold reminds me
that no one really knows what
happened
to the hikers that night.
At a place called Mount
Kholat-Syakhl
or in English. the Dead
Mountain.
Four days into their journey.
and the group reached a small
logging camp
called Settlement 41.
These hardworking men of the
Urals
may have been among the last
people to see the hikers alive.
- [Liam] The following
day. the team negotiated
with one of the locals to take
their packs by horse and cart
for the next leg of their
journey.
But even without the heavy
packs.
it took the team seven
hours of tough ski hiking
to arrive at this derelict
settlement.
Abandoned seven years earlier.
it was one of Russia's infamous
gulags.
A forced labor camp for
criminals.
Undeterred by its past.
the team found one hut still
intact enough
to provide modest shelter for
the night.
But for Yuri Yudin. the cold
weather and arduous journey
had flared up his back pain.
forcing him to make a decision
that would profoundly affect his
fate.
- [Liam] Yuri said an emotional
goodbye to his friends.
looking forward to seeing them
again soon.
Oblivious to the events that
would unfold
in just three short days.
Yuri died in 2013. age 75.
never knowing what really
happened that tragic night.
At his request. he was buried
in Yekaterinburg Cemetery.
next to his friends. reunited at
last.
[dramatic music]
Our expeditions in the Dyatlov
Pass
was about to face it's own
challenges.
We reach a small frozen river
outlet
that has partially thawed.
Worryingly. all around.
I hear the surface ice
cracking beneath us.
Thankfully. we reached safety
and a well earned rest.
- [Liam] It seems the
group had no indication
that in just three short
days. disaster would strike.
It may be hard to imagine
that people would live here
but the Mansi and Khanty peoples
of Northern Western Siberia
have called this area home
for thousands of years.
These indigenous people
traditionally survive
through fishing. hunting
and herding reindeer.
Much of this way of life remains
today.
Since the 13th century.
the two separate groups
of Mansi and Khanty people
were often united in fiercely
defending their lands
against the invading Russians.
But by the time of Soviet era
Russia.
the indigenous way of
life suffered greatly
as their lands were taken
and their numbers diminished.
Their shamans and even folk
customs were persecuted.
So it was not unreasonable
that some of the Mansi
and Khanty populations
had a distrust and resentment
towards the Soviet Russians.
Dyatlov and his team however.
were greatly intrigued by
these indigenous people.
And we're excited to learn more
of their language and customs.
- [Liam] We arrive at a Mansi
village.
some 25 miles away from the
Dyatlov Pass.
And I'm keen to find out
what the villages remember
about the incident.
This woman's father even
joined the rescue team.
Do you like living here?
It's very cold though.
We're making a film
about the Dyatlov team.
has she heard of them?
Several Mansi. well known
and respected by officials
were hired as experts to help
trace the missing hikers.
But as the only inhabitants of
the area.
there was still an eye of
suspicion on the local people.
As early theories emerged.
investigators were interested
in a rumor that the
hikers may have stumbled
onto a sacred Mansi site
and paid a heavy price for their
trespass.
And when the hikers tent was
discovered.
it was the strange cut marks
that thrust further suspicion
on the Mansi people.
- [Narrator] Criminal
prosecutor Lev Ivanov.
"It was established.
the group suddenly left the tent
and there is a reason
to believe that the tent
was cut by someone.
Establishing if the tent
was cut or torn apart
is essential to the case."
- We know that the first
theory of Ivanov was murder.
He later said that the
students could be scared
or forced off the tent only
by the group of armed people.
at least nine of them should be
there.
As the forensic investigation
continued.
members of a nearby Mansi
family. the Bakhtiyarovs.
were summoned for questioning
about their sacred practices.
- [Liam] However. when the
forensic report
on the tent came in. it
revealed a shocking discovery.
It was indeed cut by a blade.
but astonishingly. the
report said it was cut
from the inside.
The experts now believe
the panicked tourists
cut their own way out of the
tent.
It was then unlikely
that anyone was attacking
them from the outside.
So the investigation into
the local Mansi people
was dropped.
Lev Ivanov and his team were now
left
with more questions than
answers.
Just what were the hikers
fleeing from?
Our journey has taken
us deep into the Urals.
many miles away from the nearest
town.
Home for the night will
be the hunting cabin
owned by the Mansi we met
earlier today.
We settle down for the
night on the hard floor
and I'm thankful for the
warmth of this cabin.
60 years ago. the Dyatlov
team didn't have this luxury
as they recorded their
penultimate diary entry.
- [Liam] Today. we make the
journey to the Dyatlov Pass.
But of course. nothing is
guaranteed in the mountains.
- [Liam] So it could be quite
different?
- How difficult is the journey
today?
- We might fall off today?
- What started out as a little
more
than a Google search has led
me halfway around the world.
Exploring this desolate and
beautiful land
so far removed from my modern
day life.
brings me closer to Dyatlov and
his team
than I ever thought possible.
I'm beginning to understand
why they came here.
To challenge themselves
physically.
to overcome the hardships.
and to explore the unknown.
Frustratingly. we've come
as far as we can today.
The fresh snow is too deep
and soft for our snowmobiles.
So we're about a kilometer away
from the Dyatlov Pass tent site.
We couldn't take the
snowmobiles any closer
because this fresh snow.
it's very sloping track.
And these are just too
heavy for the snowmobiles.
So we're gonna make a
base camp here tonight
and we can make the rest of
the way on the snowmobiles
without the trolleys.
Hard work.
As we settle in for the night.
the team reminds me of perhaps
one of the more bizarre theories
that gained sensationalist
attention.
- Go to forest.
- [Liam] The Russian Yeti.
The hikers created a peculiar
document in the style
of a newspaper front page
called the Evening Otorten.
A transcribed copy was
included in the case files.
And one headline caused
a greater sensation
than the hikers could have ever
imagined.
- [Narrator] "In the recent
years.
there has been a heated debate
about the existence of Yeti.
According to the recent reports.
Yeti lives in the Northern
Urals near Otorten mountain."
- [Liam] And with a
few out of focus photos
on the team's camera. a legend
was born.
- With this particular case for
Yeti.
it's all about
misinterpretations
of the cultural thing.
It was entirely humoristic.
It was about making fun of each
other.
And it's about picture.
If you look through all
the pictures in this role.
all the film. it's obvious
that this blurred picture
of the last one is one of
the many in their roll.
- [Liam] As members of the
backup team arrive at base camp.
we settle in for the night.
hopefully free from any wild
beast.
oblivious. to the more
real dangers of the storm
heading our way.
- [Narrator] Diary entry. Igor
Dyatlov.
- [Liam] Dyatlov's word.
would be the very last left by
the group.
His diary seems to foreshadow
the terrible events to come.
The following day. the
team left a cache of food
and equipment for their return
journey to Mount Otorten.
The worsening weather
and deep snow forced them to
build a camp
after traveling only a mile and
a half
on to Mount Kholat-Syakhl.
the Dead Mountain.
Before morning. all nine
friends would be dead.
- When the group failed to
come back to Yekaterinburg
on the 12th of February. no
one was immediately alarmed.
The first person who was
alarmed was Rimma Kolevatov
the sister of Sasha Kolevatov.
And she started to make
telephone calls
to the Explorers Clubs. to the
university.
- [Liam] It wasn't until
February 21st.
over a week after the hikers
were due to have sent word
of their return.
that the first teams of
search parties were deployed.
However. with only a rough idea
of the team's expected location.
it would prove to be a difficult
task.
The search teams comprised
of professionals.
military and fellow student
members
of the university's Explorers
Club.
For those friends. this
was still a rescue mission.
Evgeniy was a member
of another hiking team
in a similar area.
His and Dyatlov's teams
were expecting to connect
on their return journey.
An aerial search was conducted
along with multiple teams
on the ground. and it
would take several days
before the rescue has
got their first clue.
The hikers partially snow
covered tent.
Officially. the tent was
found on February the 26th
by fellow student hikers. Boris
Slobstov
and Mikhail Sharavin.
They were accompanied by
a local forestry worker.
Ivan Pashin. who lived and
worked alongside the Mansi
people
in the region.
However. Pashin later
stated in his testimony.
- [Liam] This statement was
backed up
by his friend and fellow
search team member. Cheglakov.
- [Liam] It's incredible to me
that these two men did not look
inside
for any signs of the hikers or
perhaps even more incredible.
that they didn't report such
a huge finding right away.
Officially. it would take two
more days
of aerial and ground searches
before Slobstov and Sharavin
accompanied by Pashin.
spotted the tent on Mount
Kholat-Syakhl.
As they ascended the mountain.
Pashin refused to go with them.
- For me. it speaks for the fact
that he has already heard
something from the Mansi.
That something happened on the
slope
but he felt like it's better
to stay away from this matter.
They had also their traditions
and they didn't want
anyone to mess with that.
- [Liam] As they approached
their friend's tent.
it quickly became apparent
that this was an unusual scene.
Along with the flashlight
found on top of the snow.
what they found left
inside was more worrying.
- [Liam] With no trace of the
hikers.
finding their winter clothes
and boots was unnerving.
The following day.
the search parties focused their
attention on the tent site.
And further down the slope.
the rescuers found their next
clue.
- [Liam] Later stories would
suggest
that the hikers fled in a panic
from some terrifying event.
But the footsteps as seen by
Slobstov
clearly show how the hikers
walked
or marched side by side.
away from the tent.
The searches followed the
partially visible tracks
down the slope where the team
uncovered
their first grisly discovery.
The bodies of Krivonischenko
and Doroshenko
were found under a cedar tree
nearly a mile away from the
tent.
Evgeniy Maslennikov.
head of the university sports
club wrote:
- [Liam] Later that same day.
a thousand feet away from the
cedar tree.
the team made another grim
discovery.
The frozen body of group
leader. Igor Dyatlov.
He had collapsed around a small
birch tree
facing towards the tent.
suggesting that he was
attempting to return.
- [Liam] Finding the
bodies of the four hikers
was a devastating blow
to the rescue party.
In the following days.
the search teams painstakingly
probe the deep snow
for any signs of their comrades.
On March 5th. six long days
after the discovery of
the first four bodies.
the searches uncovered
another. Rustem Slobodin.
He too was found facing in
the direction of the tent.
suggesting he was also trying
to make a desperate return
to shelter and warm clothing.
All five of the hikers found so
far
were flown to Ivdel for autopsy.
The searcher's grim task
continued
and the days turned into
weeks with no new clues
as to where the remaining
four hikers could be.
[gentle music]
In a bizarre parallel
to Dyatlov's journey.
our own expedition has been hit
by a savage blizzard and the
dangerous drop in temperature
on the day we were due
to make it to the Pass.
[dramatic music]
Nature calls the shots out
here
and to try to make to the Pass
today
would be far too dangerous.
The autopsy of the five
hikers was conducted in Ivdel
by forensic medical expert.
Vozrozhdenny.
Doroshenko. Krivonischenko.
Dyatlov.
Kolmogorova and Slobodin.
were all found to have suffered
various cuts and bruises
to the body.
Specific injuries included
bruising cuts and abrasions
to the nose. eyebrows and
cheeks.
Further bruising and abrasions
were found on the knuckles
and the back of the hands.
Yet. under close watch
from the party officials.
Vozrozhdenny concluded
that all of these injuries
were simply as a result of
falling over.
The official cause of death for
all five
was stated as hypothermia.
- Today. if you see a guy. if
you see his upper lip swollen.
a black eye.
and his fists scabbed over.
Do you think that he panicked
and he ran really fast
and he threw himself
against the rocks?
No. your first thought
is there must be a fight.
- [Liam] A rumor spread
that perhaps the group
turned on themselves.
Investigator Ivanov feared
that the party leaders
would use this to cover up the
truth of the investigation.
Something he wasn't
prepared to let happen.
In an effort to divert
the growing attention.
the officials attempted
to quietly bury the hikers
hundreds of miles away
from their home city.
This only fueled conspiracy
theories.
And under mounting public
pressure.
the officials were forced
to return the hikers home.
- Back in the city.
the people try to make
sense of what have happened.
They questioned military
authorities.
Why. how come. what could be?
In the middle of nowhere.
why would they die?
And the funerals. they were just
huge.
Just exactly what the
authority wanted to prevent.
it happened.
There were thousands
and thousands of people
who attended during the funeral.
- [Liam] Those that were there
remember being watched by the
KGB.
stoking fears that the
military were to blame.
Rumors of unusual lights in
the sky. strange photographs
and secret military tests began
to spread.
Vladislav Karelin and his team
were hiking
in the Urals not far from the
Dyatlov Pass
only two weeks after the tragedy
when they themselves witnessed
an unusual celestial event.
Could Karelin sighting prove the
hikers
controversial photo was
in fact a real object.
Given the sightings in 1959.
many involved with the Dyatlov
Foundation.
believe the military rocket
theory is the most plausible.
Yet Karelin's own team
also witnessed these lights
but it certainly didn't scare
them
from fleeing the safety of their
tent.
- Well. I don't believe
there could be a rocket
or military experiment
that injured the hikers.
Well. definitely there was
something going on in the sky
at that period of time.
The event was pretty far from
them
Since they were capable
of taking pictures.
And it lasted at least one. two
minutes.
It means. it was not threatening
to them.
Certainly. the autopsy reports
from the first five hikers
showed no obvious signs of
injury from a missile blast
nor were there any signs of an
explosion or debris reported
by the search teams.
With this frustratingly
conflicting evidence.
the investigators could
only hope that finding
the last four hikers
would unravel the mystery.
[upbeat music]
Three months after the incident
and the melting snows led
to a breakthrough.
Mansi native Kurikov.
spotted some cut branches.
only 150 feet from the cedar
tree
that seemed to form a trail.
Along with his dog.
he discovered the remains of
some clothing
which appeared to be cut by a
knife.
The search team swiftly
focused in on the area
and began to dig.
Buried under more than 10 feet
of snow.
they found a small den.
Cut branches were laid
to make a makeshift floor
but there was no sign of the
hikers.
Fellow student hiker. Vladimir
Askinadzi.
was one of the students tasked
with probing the area
to look for his friends.
Buried 12 feet under the snow.
was the body of Lyudmila
Dubinina.
She was found in a small ravine.
collapsed over a natural ledge.
The three remaining bodies
of Kolevatov. Thibeaux. and
Zolotaryov
were found close to Dubinina.
They lay next to each other.
perhaps in a desperate attempt
to share body warmth
in their final moments.
The bodies were carefully
removed and carried back
to the evacuation point.
but the fears of military tests
and possible radiation
contamination was rife.
The helicopter pilots fearing
the risk
of radiation poisoning.
refused to transport the
bodies until they were placed
in zinc lined cases.
The move suggested that
even senior officials
were growing suspicious.
And the autopsy was about to
reveal
some grim and unexpected
details.
Thibeaux. although found dressed
warmer
than the first five hikers
had suffered a mysterious
and devastating blow to
the right side of his head.
- [Liam] The examiners
found that Kolevatov
was also dressed reasonably well
against the elements with
ski jacket and pants.
However. his boots were missing.
and he too had some unusual
injuries.
- [Liam] The examiner
seemed to make little effort
to better understand the
cause of these injuries.
Officially. he stated that they
died from freezing to death.
Still. the mystery only
deepened.
Zolotaryov. the oldest of
the team was again found
with a basic level of clothing.
under layers. ski pants
and a jacket with the
upper buttons undone.
The examiner noted the
horrific facial decay
presumably from the
stream he was found in.
But it was the unexplained
crushing impact
to Zolotaryov's chest
that was most unusual.
- [Liam] Lyuda wore ski pants
which were badly fire
damaged and two sweaters.
Missing her snow boots.
she had desperately wrapped a
torn sweater around her feet.
She was found lying face down
in a stream of melting snow.
The examiner stated this caused
the horrific decaying facial
tissue and her missing eyes.
Incredibly. he also noted
that her tongue was missing
without any further explanation
as to why.
Shockingly. there was a
similar finding to Zolotaryov.
Lyuda suffered a brutal
impact to her chest.
fracturing multiple ribs
and was powerful enough
to puncture her heart.
- [Liam] The forensic examiner's
confounding conclusions
did little to explain the
tragedy
and only raised more questions.
Lead investigator Ivanov
have had little to work on.
And given the speculation
of military tests.
he ordered the students
clothes to be tested
for radioactivity.
Incredibly. some of
those found in the ravine
showed above normal levels of
radiation.
For Ivanov. there was no
obvious answer in sight.
As the whispers of rocket.
military tests
and now radiation spread.
the investigation was
seemingly out of control.
The Soviet government frustrated
and unable to curb the
rumors that implicated
their own military. summoned
Ivanov back to headquarters
and ordered that the case be
closed.
- No further investigation
was carried out.
The strange circumstances and
injuries
simply left unexplained.
Now. the case files hidden until
the fall
of the Soviet Union will be the
key to uncovering the truth.
[soft music]
We've traveled nearly 100 miles.
and we're just a few miles
from the Dyatlov Pass.
Our expedition was forced
to camp for the night
and take shelter from a brutal
storm.
The worst seems to have passed.
but today's challenge
will be to navigate the deep
snow.
It's snowing quite a lot.
And I know they're concerned
about the safety of us
getting to the Pass
yesterday. I don't think it's
gonna get any easier today.
I'm determined to get there.
So we'll take the snowmobiles
as far as we can go.
And then we'll hike the rest of
the way.
[intense dramatic music]
The heavy snow on the mountain
is making it difficult
for the snowmobiles to
stay upright or avoid rocks
lurking deceptively
just below the surface.
Even a small injury out
here could prove deadly.
This is our first steep
slope we had come up.
It was a bit too steep for two
people.
So we'll walk the rest of the
way.
I think it's gonna be a
lot more of that today.
This is tough conditions.
Leaving the snowmobiles behind.
we make the rest of the journey
on foot.
Traveling a relatively short
distance
of just a couple of miles
in this deep snow is
incredibly slow going.
Finally. through the thickening
skies.
the boot rock comes into view.
This was the landing area for
the search teams back in 1959.
It's truly an incredible
experience for me.
I can hardly believe
I've journeyed this far.
and I'm almost at the very
location
of the Dyatlov Pass incident.
The names of the nine
hikers that died here
on February the 3rd. 1959.
will forever be remembered
in this beautiful yet desolate
place.
We still have a tough walk ahead
of us
but I'm determined to make
it to the actual location
where the Dyatlov group tent was
found.
So we push on into darkening
skies.
My journey has led me
through many incredible
theories on this case.
And perhaps. the most shocking
is about to be revealed.
Sakharova has studied
the documents extensively
and found a number of problems
starting with the tent.
The expert's opinions
at the time suggested
that the tent was cut from
the inside by the hikers.
This fact was instrumental in
leading the investigators away
from any theory that the
hikers may have been attacked.
If the findings from the tent
examination
led the investigators away from
the theory
that the hikers may have been
attacked.
that may have also clouded
their interpretation
of later evidence.
If Sakharova is right.
then the proof that the
hikers were murdered
may well be right here
in the autopsy reports
hidden in plain sight
but I'm going to need some
help to decipher the clues.
- My name is Ken Holmes
and I was in the Marin County
coroner's office for 36 years.
The last 12 of which I
was the elected coroner.
And we handled all the death
investigations that occurred
in the County of Marin.
I believe the autopsies
probably are very thorough
but I would disagree with the
accuracy
of the conclusions for
at least seven of them.
The amount of trauma
absolutely precludes any sort
of accidental fall. at
least from their own height.
Certainly not just
walking along in the snow
and falling down.
It appears that the officials
involved
at the time of the autopsies.
basically tried to sweep this
entire thing under the rug
trying to make it look like
some unfortunate accident.
[dramatic music]
- My name is Mick Fennerty.
I'm retired special agent with
the FBI.
And spent just over 20
years working for the FBI.
And I spent almost 15 years
total
on our evidence response team.
The team responsible
for investigating our
more complex crime scenes.
Many cases are filled with
strange things.
But yeah. this one has several.
If you look at the simplest
explanation.
the principal of Occam's razor
that the most simple answer
is often the most correct
answer.
Hikers were forced out of their
tent.
I mean. you just can't explain
why they would leave their
boots.
unless they were forced out into
the cold.
Why they didn't immediately
return to the tent
knowing that they were
gonna die of exposure
out in the cold without boots.
When you look at the wounds
that were on the hikers.
I'm just not buying the
accidental thing.
this was a homicide.
[dramatic music]
- These new experts have all
suggested
that what happened to
Dyatlov's team was no accident.
So we know that both
Lyudmila and Zolotaryov.
both suffered bone crushing
injuries to the chest.
And given the position of the
bodies.
we know it couldn't have
come from the same impact.
- My thinking is that he was
laying down maybe on his back
and something very. very
heavy dropped across him.
Could have been someone stepping
on him or stomping on him.
Certainly possible.
The interesting thing is
that the rib fractures
are all very high.
They start right underneath the
collarbone
and only go about halfway down
which is not typical of somebody
falling down on their own
or falling against rocks or a
log.
So it's more likely that he was
stationary
and something heavy came down
upon him.
- [Liam] Lyudmila suffered
similar.
but more devastating injuries.
- The rib fractures.
they were of such impact
that the ribs flexed
after being broken and
actually punctured the heart.
That takes an incredible blow.
And the ones that I have seen
is either in a motor vehicle
accident
or a fall from a very high
place.
and I'm talking about 50 feet.
She didn't just trip and fall
and go down on her chest.
something very. very
heavy fell against her.
Could one person do that?
Yes. but again. it would
take a pretty hefty person.
If they were doing it on their
own.
they would be probably jumping
or throwing themselves against
her.
- Lyudmila was missing her
eyeballs and her tongue.
The autopsy report said
this was because she was
laying face down in a stream
underneath the snow.
Now that may attribute the
soft tissue damage to her eyes
but the tongue is much bigger
muscle.
To me. that seems strange.
Thibeaux was found in the
same stream as these two.
except he had a massive
fracture to his right temple.
Even the autopsy report
said it was highly unlikely
he could have suffered this
injury simply from falling over.
- He easily could have been
struck.
The kind of blow that is
described.
it looks like the head was
unsupported.
In other words. it wasn't on the
ground
where something hit his head
so that he couldn't move away.
- Kolevatov was the
fourth member of the team
to be found in the same stream.
Kolevatov actually suffered
a really sizable wound
behind his ear. which
is really unusual to do
by accidentally falling over.
The autopsy report also
noted that his neck
had been damaged.
The first to be found by the
cedar tree were Yuri Doroshenko
and Yuri Krivonischenko.
Doroshenko had cuts and bruises
to eyes. nose. and lips.
But he also had bruising and
abrasing
to the inside of the arms
and into the armpits.
Krivonischenko. his
injuries included bruising
to the forehead around
the left temporal bone.
His knuckles and fingers
were bruised and swollen
and he also suffered terrible
burn to his left leg.
For me. what's really
strange about the injuries
to both Krivonischenko and
Doroshenko
was the fact that their
injuries actually weren't so bad
with perhaps the exception of
the burn
to Krivonischenko's left leg.
What was actually stopping them
from returning to the tent?
Rustem Slobodin was found 500
meters
away from the cedar tree.
It looked like he was heading
back towards the tent.
He was found with bruised
knuckles
as well as bruising to the face
and legs.
Rustem suffered a massive
fracture to the side of his
skull.
Rustem was probably knocked
unconscious
and very near to where he was
found.
So whatever struck him
was a very different event
to what happened to the others.
Zina was found 600 meters
away from the cedar tree.
She was found with bruising
all around her face.
Zina also suffered a 30
centimeter long bruise
across the back and the kidney
area.
which must've knocked the wind
out of her.
But also she had bad bruising
across both knuckles.
Again. was she fighting some
attackers?
- Well. certainly you
could make a case for that.
On the other hand.
you could also make a case
that over the course of
the three or four days
before she died.
she could have done it scraping
against ice accidentally.
I would say it looks to me
like she was defending herself
with some of the bruises.
but then on her knuckles.
that's not indicative of a
defensive wound
as much as it is of a
thrusting from her standpoint.
- Igor Dyatlov was found
lying again in the direction
of the tent. suggesting that
he too was trying to go back
for supplies.
As a respected group leader.
I don't think for a second
he wouldn't have done his
best to try and help himself
and the team.
The autopsy reports stated
that he had bruising to his
knuckles.
But what's most interesting to
me
was he had bruising and
abrasions
to both his wrists and ankles
[Natalia speaking in foreign
language]
- I have tried and tried and
tried.
I've spent a great deal
of time trying to come up
with a scenario that would
cover the variety of injuries.
the spacing of the people
and where they're found
and how they're found.
It's very difficult for me
to come up with any scenario
other than there must have
been some other people present.
[dramatic music]
- [Liam] Like every theory in
this case.
there always seems to be
one piece of the puzzle
that just doesn't fit.
In this case. it's the lights in
the sky.
Karelin and others still
believe that rockets
were in some way connected.
Yet. there's no evidence of
an explosion at the site.
But could some rockets
have affected the hikers
in another way?
- Any volatile gas that could
have affected these people.
no way to prove it would be
there after such a long time
in the snow.
But there didn't seem
to be any description
from the lungs or the throats
for the type of injuries
that we see with gas.
- But even if a chemical had
affected them psychologically.
that doesn't explain
how they later received
those violent injuries so
far away from the tent.
In those conditions. it
could have taken the group
more than an hour to walk
that distance without skis.
Why would they walk
relatively calmly for an hour
and then lose their minds
and inflict those injuries of
themselves?
It just doesn't add up.
I do believe it plausible
that the Soviets were testing
rockets over the Urals
at the time. but I just
don't see any evidence
that it could have directly
affected the group.
For me. I think the lights
in the sky are red herring.
They've derailed the case
for more than 60 years
and they continue to today.
But there's still another
difficult piece of the puzzle
that has fueled the
military conspiracy theories
for more than 60 years.
radiation.
Two of the four hikers
found in the ravine.
Lyuda and Kolevatov.
both wore clothes that tested
positive for radiation.
For many. this is proof
that some military weapon
killed the hikers.
But if that was the case. how
come radiation wasn't found
on any other member of the team?
Again. we need to look
for the simplest answer.
The sweater Lyuda was wearing
showed the highest levels of
radiation.
But in fact. this sweater
belonged to Krivonischenko.
who was found near the cedar
tree.
It looks like Lyuda may
have taken his sweater
after his death.
I've recently found a document
that shows that
Krivonischenko actually worked
at a nuclear facility.
Which only a year and a half
earlier.
suffered a major nuclear
explosion.
The Kyshtym disaster was at the
time.
the world's largest nuclear
disaster.
And even today. it's the third
largest
after Fukushima and Chernobyl.
Incredibly. most of us have
never even heard of it.
And that's because it was
almost entirely concealed
by the Soviets at the time.
In 1957. just a few days
after the explosion.
hundreds of local villages had
died of radiation poisoning
and more than 10.000 were
subsequently evacuated.
Given that this was one
of the world's first
major nuclear explosions.
it wouldn't be a surprise
to me that the cleanup team
including Krivonischenko were
unprepared and unprotected.
It's likely that he even
suspected his authorities
of being careless towards their
safety.
I've recently been sent a copy
of a letter
written by Krivonischenko
himself
that seems to express his
frustration.
- The second positive test for
radiation
was on Kolevatov's clothes.
Incredibly. I found that after
graduation.
he too went to work
for a secretive nuclear
facility in Moscow.
It's quite possible that
he either came into contact
with materials from the Kyshtym
site
or he may have simply worn
the contaminated sweater
before giving it to Lyuda.
For me. the likelihood that the
radiation
found on the hikers' clothes
came from an actual nuclear
meltdown
where we know Krivonischenko
worked is far more likely
than some experimental weapons
attack.
So if rockets and radiation
were explainable red herrings.
Why was the military still
so eager to be involved?
- All of the secrecy was around
this case.
Not because there was
some military experiment
or rocket crash.
but because Lev Ivanov
reported to his supervisors
that there were some strange
phenomena in the sky observed.
They just didn't want any
information out
before the investigation is
done.
- [Liam] This was during the
tensions of the Cold War.
The race for nuclear supremacy
was of the highest importance.
We now know that
Krivonischenko and Kolevatov
had reasonable ways
in which they could have come
into contact with radiation.
But importantly. from
the Soviet's position.
that's two hikers who may have
had access
to secret information or
materials.
Finding the last four bodies
must have been a relief
for the authorities.
They now knew that the hikers
had not defected as spies.
But when Ivanov requested
a radiation examination.
the Soviets were faced
with a new challenge.
Information about the
nuclear disaster at Kyshtym
might leak to the public.
This would have been a massive
blow
to Russia's nuclear credibility.
Lev even wrote about his
experiences
years after the collapse
of the Soviet union
- The Soviet government had
their answer.
the hikers had not defected.
The true cause of the tragedy
was of little consequences to
them now.
And the truth about the Dyatlov
Pass
was buried along with the
hikers.
[intense dramatic music]
So if the Soviet
government wasn't involved
in the hikers' death. who was?
The Dyatlov Pass is 50 miles
away
from the nearest village of
Vizhay.
The only people known to go near
the Pass
were the indigenous Mansi
people.
And so. the Mansi were the
original prime suspects.
- [Liam] Despite the suspicion.
the Mansi were quickly ruled
out for two key reasons.
One. the investigators believe
the hikers cut their own way
out of the tent.
Although I've already uncovered
that this was not definitively
proven
and probably incorrect.
Secondly. the local Russians
testified
that the Mansi were friendly
and some even offered to
help in the search efforts.
But does a friend's
recommendation
or being helpful to officials
rule you out of suspicion?
- No. we certainly have
seen in unsolved homicides
and all sorts of cases.
The perpetrator will come back
and insert themselves
into the investigation.
That's something that's common.
The Bahtiyarov family lived
in a nomadic camp of yurts
in the upper reaches of the
Vizhay river.
One of the brothers. Peter
Bahtiyarov said in interview.
- Yet just 10 days earlier.
his brother Nikita.
who lived in the same family
camp stated.
- [Liam] The testimonies
were clearly conflicting.
And we now know there
were more sacred places.
Closer to Dyatlov's route.
the hikers unknowingly took a
photo
of what we now know was a sacred
cave.
To the north. Man Pupu Ner was
the most sacred place of all.
Its mighty towers tell the
story of a great Mansi shaman
who turned giant warriors into
stone
when they threatened to destroy
the Mansi.
And at Mount Otorten.
the very destination of the
Dyatlov team.
similar stone pillars are found.
During an interview. another
member
of the Bahtiyarov family. Pavel.
stated that he never
went near the mountains
where the Dyatlov team were
found.
- [Liam] But despite insisting
Mansi didn't go to this area.
there were signs that suggest
someone did.
- There were people who
were present in this area.
We know that there was a
discovery of chum
like meters above the tent.
And the search parties saw this
chum
and we have a picture of it.
- So the Mansi interviewed at
the time
said they didn't go near the
mountains
and they suddenly didn't hunt in
the area.
But here we have proof that
someone was.
Just because there were some
indigenous people in the area.
that doesn't mean there was
any real motive for an attack.
But when I dug deeper. there
were signs that the Russian
and indigenous people's
cohabitation
wasn't always harmonious.
In the 1930s. the Soviets
formed a new town called Kazym
in the Siberian Mansi-Khanty
region.
The idea was to bring schools
and medical facilities
to the local people as part of
the Soviet collectivization.
However. these changes
were imposed on the locals
who were not given a say in the
matter.
They were forced to
comply with Soviet rules
and their children were forcibly
taken
to attend boarding schools.
where they were forbidden to
practice
their native language and
beliefs.
Understandably. the local people
were outraged and rebelled
against the authorities.
resulting in a number of
deadly conflicts in the 1930s.
Following these clashes.
Mansi and Khanty culture was
outlawed.
Sacred grounds were destroyed
And Sharmans practicing ancient
rituals were imprisoned.
The outlawing of thousands
of years of cultural belief
and history would have
undoubtedly fueled
a bitter resentment towards the
Soviet.
These rituals and practices
were still officially illegal
when the Dyatlov group attempted
to reach Mount Otorten.
Yet. signs of that tradition
still persist today.
We now know there were sacred
places in the mountains
and I'm not the first to wonder
if the Dyatlov group stumbled
onto a place of great
importance to the Mansi.
Do you think it's possible
the Mansi might've killed the
hikers
because they came across a
sacred site
or perhaps. a sacred artifact?
Speaking with Alexey.
I'm reminded how
dangerous and unfair it is
to make generalizations
towards whole groups of people.
Since the Dyatlov incident.
there have been no other reports
of Mansi attacking
Russians over sacred land.
And certainly. my journey to the
Pass
was met with a warm welcome.
But the evidence so
far still suggest to me
that it was murder.
So I keep looking.
- Whoever attacked the students.
they were flesh and blood
because students were
capable of fighting back.
Generally. the people
who lived in the area
they're called the Mansi.
There are yet another
people called the Khanty.
They are not living there
constantly.
but there were rumors that some
of them.
just several of them were
living secluded in the area.
And they were not friends
with Mansi or with Russians.
- [Liam] Digging through
the official reports.
I spotted a detail that might
just provide
the biggest clue yet.
The official report from
police officer. Gorbushin.
in the town of Ivdel.
He speaks of an informal
conversation he had
with a member of the Mansi
Kurikov family.
- [Liam] Later. a member
of the Kurikov family.
Grigoriy. was officially
interviewed.
- [Liam] Despite the
police offices tantalizing
piece of information.
the suspicion that other
indigenous people
were living in the area was
not further investigated.
And there's one last clue.
A strip of dark material
found at the cedar tree
where the first two
bodies were discovered.
Search party member. Boris
Slobstov wrote.
- [Liam] Despite the clues
and evidence of violence.
the authorities dropped the
search
for any possible attackers.
The truth of this unknown
compelling force
has remained hidden under
wintery snows
and tightly held secrets
for more than 60 years.
- The crushing injuries
and the skull fractures
because they're so different.
there had to be three or four
assailants
involved in whatever this
incident was.
And I don't believe that in any
way.
could just be an accident.
- When you look at the wounds
that were on the hikers.
I'm just not buying the
accidental thing.
this was a homicide.
- I have a strong conviction
that military people
wouldn't do it this way.
There is an expression in
Russian.
If there is no body. there is no
case.
[dramatic music]
- [Liam] From the beginning.
this mystery captured my
imagination.
And after two years of studying
the case.
it's become something more.
Every diary entry. every
glance and every photo
seems to hide a clue like a
distant voice compelling me
to join the search.
So this is roughly where
the Dyatlov tent was found.
It's incredible to be here
and I can see why they wanted
to be out here. it's beautiful.
And it's so isolated.
Like 100 kilometers away
from any other village.
It must've been absolutely
exhilarating for them
to have been hiking in
these types of locations.
And it's still a mystery
as to what happened
but I certainly understand
better
why they came out here
in the first place now.
[dramatic music]
In some small way.
I feel I've come to know the
hikers.
I certainly wish I could
have had the chance
to have met them.
I think we could have
shared an adventure or two.
There may be more evidence
and theories surrounding
this case to come.
But out of respect of the
Dyatlov group.
I believe they should all be
explored with an open mind.
We may be looking at it
through different lenses
but our vision is the same.
to lay to rest the mystery of
an unknown compelling force.
[intense dramatic music]